



Internet Engineering Task Force                           D. Ristea, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                                D. Huigens
Updates: 4880bis (if approved)                    Proton Technologies AG
Intended status: Standards Track                            P. Jovanovic
Expires: 24 May 2021                           University College London
                                                        20 November 2020


                 Symmetric-Key Cryptography in OpenPGP
                draft-ietf-openpgp-symmetric-encryption

Abstract

   This document defines an extension to the OpenPGP standard to support
   persistent symmetric keys, used for message encryption and for
   authentication with message authentication codes.  Symmetric
   cryptography can be used in contexts that do not require asymmetric
   cryptographic algorithms, such as data storage, for improved
   performance, lower key sizes, and resistance to quantum computing.
   Symmetric algorithms already defined by the standard are re-used and
   this proposal introduces no additional symmetric algorithms or packet
   types.  It extends the definition of Secret-Key Packets, Public-Key
   Encrypted Session Key Packets, and Signature Packets to support
   symmetric operations.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 24 May 2021.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2020 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.





Ristea, et al.             Expires 24 May 2021                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft    Symmetric-Key Cryptography in OpenPGP    November 2020


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Simplified BSD License text
   as described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Conventions Used in This Document . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  Motivation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   4.  Persistent symmetric-key management . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   5.  AEAD encryption of session keys . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   6.  HMAC-based signature packets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   7.  Other changes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   8.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   9.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     9.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     9.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7

1.  Introduction

   The OpenPGP standard RFC 4880 [RFC4880] has supported symmetric
   encryption for data packets using session keys since its inception,
   as well as symmetric encryption using password-derived keys.  This
   proposal extends the use of symmetric cryptography by adding support
   for persistent symmetric keys which can be used to symmetrically
   encrypt session keys.  This proposal uses authenticated encryption
   with associated data (AEAD) as proposed by RFC 4880bis
   [I-D.ietf-openpgp-rfc4880bis].

   The OpenPGP standard supports the use of digital signatures for
   authentication and integrity but no similar symmetric mechanism
   exists in the standard.  With the introduction of persistent
   symmetric keys, this proposals also introduces messages
   authentication codes (MAC) as a symmetric counterpart to digital
   signatures.  Specifically, this proposal uses hash-based message
   authentication (HMAC) to ensure the integrity of stored data.

   This document describes the changes required to extend the use of
   symmetric-key cryptography to the encryption of session keys and
   HMAC-based authentication.





Ristea, et al.             Expires 24 May 2021                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft    Symmetric-Key Cryptography in OpenPGP    November 2020


2.  Conventions Used in This Document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].
   Any implementation that adheres to the format and methods specified
   in this document is called a compliant application.  Compliant
   applications are a subset of the broader set of OpenPGP applications
   described in RFC 4880 [RFC4880] and RFC 4880bis
   [I-D.ietf-openpgp-rfc4880bis].  Any RFC 2119 [RFC2119] keyword within
   this document applies to compliant applications only.

3.  Motivation

   When compared to asymmetric cryptography, symmetric cryptography can
   provide increased performance and equivalent security with shorter
   keys.  In contexts that do not require asymmetric cryptography, such
   as secure data storage where the same user encrypts and decrypts
   data, symmetric cryptography can be used to take advantage of its
   benefits.

   Additionally, symmetric algorithms included in OpenPGP are vulnerable
   to attacks possible on quantum computers Shor [Shor].  The
   development of quantum-secure asymmetric cryptography is an area of
   active research NIST [NIST].  Symmetric cryptography is also affected
   by quantum computing but to a lesser extent which can be countered
   using larger keys Grover [Grover].  Quantum-secure asymmetric
   encryption will be required to secure communications but proactive
   measures to protect OpenPGP-encrypted storage can be taken by
   introducing persistent symmetric keys, which can be used to re-
   encrypt storage.

4.  Persistent symmetric-key management

   To allow for symmetric keys to be stored, generic symmetric algorithm
   values are added to list of public-key algorithms.

   This document extends section 9.1.  "Public-Key Algorithms" to
   include:

   *  25: authenticated encryption with associated data (AEAD)

   *  26: hash-based message authentication code (HMAC)

   Allow values 25 and 26 to be used to denote the algorithm of OpenPGP
   keys.  This enables Secret-Key Packets to hold symmetric key
   material.




Ristea, et al.             Expires 24 May 2021                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft    Symmetric-Key Cryptography in OpenPGP    November 2020


   The specific symmetric algorithm is determined by the first field in
   the Algorithm-Specific Fields of a symmetric key.  This document
   extends section 5.6 to include symmetric keys:

   "5.6.7 Algorithm-Specific Part for AEAD Keys

   The public key information is composed of:

   *  A one-octet symmetric cipher

   *  A SHA2-256 hash of the last 32 octets of the private key fields

   The private key information is composed of:

   *  Symmetric key material of appropriate length for the chosen cipher

   *  A 32 octet random value used exclusively to generate the public
      hash value"

   "5.6.8 Algorithm-Specific Part for HMAC Keys

   The public key information is composed of:

   *  A one-octet hash algorithm

   *  A SHA2-256 hash of the last 32-octet value of the private key
      fields

   The private key information is composed of:

   *  Symmetric key material of appropriate length for the chosen
      cipher

   *  A 32-octet random value used exclusively to generate the public
      hash value"

   As the secret key material is required for all cryptographic
   operations with symmetric keys, implementations SHOULD NOT export
   Public-Key Packets from Secret-Key Packets holding symmetric key
   material.

5.  AEAD encryption of session keys

   Reuse Public-Key Encrypted Session Key Packets to hold symmetrically
   encrypted session keys.






Ristea, et al.             Expires 24 May 2021                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft    Symmetric-Key Cryptography in OpenPGP    November 2020


   This document extends section "5.1.  Public-Key Encrypted Session Key
   Packets (Tag 1)" to append the following to the list of Algorithm-
   Specific Fields definitions:

   "Algorithm-Specific Fields for symmetric AEAD encryption:

   *  A one-octet AEAD algorithm

   *  A starting initialization vector of size specified by AEAD mode

   *  A symmetric key encryption of "m" performed using the selected
      symmetric-key cipher operating in the given AEAD mode, prefixed
      with a one-octet length "

   For backwards compatibility, the value "m" is derived from the
   session key as is specified for existing algorithms, except that the
   PKCS #1.5 padding step is omitted.

   To reflect the usage of Public-Key Encrypted Session Key Packets (Tag
   1) for storing AEAD encrypted session keys, the name of Tag 1 packets
   is changed to Key Encrypted Session Key Packets (Tag 1).

6.  HMAC-based signature packets

   Save HMAC tags as digital signatures in Signature Packet (Tag 2)
   packets.

   This document extends section "5.2.3.  Version 4 and 5 Signature
   Packet Formats" to include:

   "Algorithm-Specific Fields for HMAC signatures:

   *  An authentication tag of appropriate length for the hash function
      prefixed by a one octet length"

   Although not required by HMAC, to maintain compatibility with
   existing signature implementations, no changes are made to section
   "5.2.4.  Computing Signatures".  HMAC tags MUST be produced from
   appropriately hashed data.












Ristea, et al.             Expires 24 May 2021                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft    Symmetric-Key Cryptography in OpenPGP    November 2020


7.  Other changes

   To adapt to the addition of symmetric encryption, in Section 2.1.
   "Confidentiality via Encryption" read "To protect the key, it is
   encrypted with the receiver's public key" as "To protect the key, it
   is encrypted with the receiver's public key or a persistent symmetric
   key" and " 3.  The session key is encrypted using each recipient's
   public key" as " 3.  The session key is encrypted using each
   recipient's public key or a persistent symmetric key".

   To adapt to the addition of MACs, 2.2.  "Authentication via Digital
   Signature" read "The digital signature uses a hash code or message
   digest algorithm, and a public-key signature algorithm" as "The
   digital signature uses a hash code or message digest algorithm, and a
   public-key signature algorithm or a message authentication code
   algorithm" and "3.  The sending software generates a signature from
   the hash code using the sender's private key" as "3.  The sending
   software generates a signature from the hash code using the sender's
   private key or a persistent symmetric key".

8.  Security Considerations

   Security considerations are discussed throughout the document where
   appropriate.

9.  References

9.1.  Normative References

   [I-D.ietf-openpgp-rfc4880bis]
              Koch, W., carlson, b., Tse, R., Atkins, D., and D.
              Gillmor, "OpenPGP Message Format", Work in Progress,
              Internet-Draft, draft-ietf-openpgp-rfc4880bis-10, 31
              August 2020, <https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-ietf-
              openpgp-rfc4880bis-10>.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

   [RFC4880]  Callas, J., Donnerhacke, L., Finney, H., Shaw, D., and R.
              Thayer, "OpenPGP Message Format", RFC 4880,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC4880, November 2007,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4880>.

9.2.  Informative References




Ristea, et al.             Expires 24 May 2021                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft    Symmetric-Key Cryptography in OpenPGP    November 2020


   [Grover]   Grover, L., "Quantum mechanics helps in searching for a
              needle in a haystack", DOI 10.1103/PhysRevLett.79.325,
              1997, <https://arxiv.org/abs/quant-ph/9706033>.

   [NIST]     NIST, "Post-Quantum Cryptography Standardization - Post-
              Quantum Cryptography: CSRC", 2020,
              <https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/post-quantum-cryptography/
              post-quantum-cryptography-standardization>.

   [Shor]     Shor, P., "Polynomial-Time Algorithms for Prime
              Factorization and Discrete Logarithms on a Quantum
              Computer", DOI 10.1137/s0097539795293172, October 1997,
              <http://dx.doi.org/10.1137/S0097539795293172>.

Authors' Addresses

   Dan Ristea (editor)
   Proton Technologies AG
   Chemin du Pre de Fleuri 3
   CH-1228 Plan les Ouates
   Switzerland


   Daniel Huigens
   Proton Technologies AG
   Chemin du Pre de Fleuri 3
   CH-1228 Plan les Ouates
   Switzerland


   Dr Philipp Jovanovic
   University College London
   Gower Street
   London
   WC1E 6BT
   United Kingdom















Ristea, et al.             Expires 24 May 2021                  [Page 7]
